“I’m trying to be an installation artist, but it can be tough to sell your work. I love fairytales because they juxtapose romance and beauty with people getting their feet cut off. So my last piece was a three-tiered chandelier of hundreds of honey bears suspended by their necks with vice grips, and dripping honey onto a bed of poisonous flowers.”
“I’ve known most of my close friends since I was four or five. We went to the same schools. We’d go to the same summer camps together. So for the first eighteen years of my life, I was never really forced to meet new people. But last year I went to college in North Carolina, and it was the first time that I didn’t know anybody. During orientation they had some sort of street fair so that you could meet new people. I followed a bunch of guys from my dorm there. I tried jumping into the conversation a few times, but it seemed like everyone was talking to each other more. Eventually they peeled off, and I just walked up and down the street alone. That pretty much set the tone for the rest of the semester. It was the longest four months of my life. It seemed like everyone was making friends except me. Or they’d already formed groups and weren’t accepting new people. I kept hearing other kids making plans after class, and it was a reminder that other people were making connections that I couldn’t. I spent most of my free time alone in my room. I’d sleep through entire weekends. I felt like a broken social person. Recently I transferred to a school closer to home, and it’s been much better. There were a few familiar faces, which helped. But I’ve also relearned how to make friends. I’ve joined a few groups. I’ve put myself out there more. I’m being more consistent with people. And I’m trying not to take it personally if someone says ‘no’ to an invitation. I’ve met some new friends this year. And I’ve realized that being social isn’t really something you are. It’s something you have to practice.”
“Have you ever thought about how we’re living in a society designed to give us anything we want, but we’re essentially the same people who lived during tribal times? We’re catering to the same base needs like warmth and sex and social gratification, but we’re doing so through unnatural means. If you think about it, the scrolling mechanism on a phone is a bit like strolling through a forest. We still come across unknown things. But now the first judgment that comes to our mind is immediately reinforced. We can say “I like it,” and we’ll be given more of the same. Or we can say ‘I don’t like it,’ and the thing will go away forever. That single mechanism ascribes permanence to our most basic instincts. We’re never forced to ask: ‘Why do I like it?’ Or ‘Should I like it?’ We’re living in a world that always adapts to us, so we never have to adapt to the world. I wonder how that affects us. I also wonder why we like squirrels but hate rats. Because they’re both rodents.”
“I just finished medical school. Now I’m heading to residency, which is supposed to be even tougher. I’ve been working sixteen-hour days. Then I’m expected to study every night when I get home. Some of my classmates only sleep three hours per night. I tried that for a few months during my surgery rotation, but I ended up getting really depressed. I felt completely depersonalized. Everything seemed like a dream. To make matters worse, a lot of the instructors are jerks. I think they went through hell when they were students, so they feel like they should put us through hell. On the first day of rotations, my attending physician told me: ‘I’m an asshole, but I’ll make you a better doctor.’ He made fun of me in front of other students. He put me down in front of patients. He’d threaten to kick me out every day. I guess they’re trying to weed people out and make strong doctors. But they’re just traumatizing people. They’re making us apathetic. I got into medicine because I really wanted to make a difference in people’s lives. But after going through hell, I just don’t care anymore.”
HONY BOOK FIRESALE. On one day each year, Amazon gives a 60% discount on the HONY books. That day is today. Both books are currently available for just over $10 and they normally retail for $30. So if you’re considering giving the gift of HONY this year, now is the time to do it! The deal is limited to 10,000 people for HONY Stories, and 5,000 people for the original Humans of New York. But even if you miss out on the coupon code, they are still marked down nearly 50%. I’m working hard on the next book, but until then-- I’m still quite proud of these two! Hope you enjoy. And Happy Holidays!
“My high school wasn’t very challenging. I never had to struggle. I was 15th in the class. Section leader in my marching band. Top of this. Top of that. Where I grew up, not too many people go to college out of state. So when I got accepted into West Point, I assumed that I’d continue to succeed. But I finished my first semester with a 2.5 GPA. Not only was I barely surviving, but I felt like I was trying as hard as I could. I started thinking: ‘Am I dumb? Can I even do this?’ My second semester I had a physics teacher named Major Bowen. He was honest with me about my faults. He told me that I needed to get more sleep. And that I had poor time management skills. But he also told me some nice stuff. He said that I was a good student to have in class. And that I was definitely smart enough to succeed. It’s nice to hear that stuff when you’re surrounded by so many naturally talented people. Major Bowen showed me ways to become more efficient. I started using calendars. I started studying in groups. I began tutoring people in calculus, because teaching is the best way to really learn a subject. Six weeks into the second semester I got my first test back, and it was an ‘A.’ It was a ’90,’ but it was an ‘A.’ It was like: ‘Oh, wow. I can do this.’”
“The symptoms didn’t start until I was seventeen. I was volunteering at a soup kitchen one day and I got such bad stomach pain that I had to sit down. That’s when I learned about Crohn’s disease, which basically means that I have ulcerations in my intestine. It’s pretty brutal. Constant pain. Sometimes I can’t get out of bed. Other times I throw up blood. Once I got so desperate that I tried to heal myself with a thirty-five day water fast. It didn’t work, and by the end I was down to 95 lbs. I’ve gone through a lot of depression because of the pain. Honestly, if it wasn’t for my wife and kids, I might have ended it by now. It’s heartbreaking for my wife to see me go through it. And it’s heartbreaking for me to put her through it. I feel like I’m holding her back. She’s so adventurous. She loves dancing, and traveling, and going out, and exploring. And I can’t do any of that. We took a three-day trip to the mountains in Seattle and I spent the entire time in tears on the couch. Same thing happened when we took the kids to Disneyland. I just hate being the sick husband. She has to pick up so much of the slack. But we’ve been to marital counseling. And I’ve told her all of this. And she swears that she wouldn’t change a thing. And that she loves me just how I am. And that I’m not a burden. I don’t know, man. We’ve been through so much shit together. I guess she just really loves me.”
“Every month in prison they had something called Inmate Council, where you get to meet with the prison administration and make suggestions. I volunteered to be the representative for my housing unit. And toward the end of the meeting, the warden asked if anyone had questions or concerns. The NBA finals were going on at the time. So I raised my hand and asked: ‘If the Cavs force a game seven, can we keep the TV on past lock up time?’ And she agreed. She agreed in front of everyone. So when game seven came around, all of us were excited. We gathered around the TV in the dayroom to watch the game. But right as the second quarter was starting, the television clicked off. The CO came down and tried to kick everybody out. I told her the warden gave us permission, but she said it didn’t matter. And that’s when things began to go downhill. We refused to leave. The CO went behind a protected gate and pulled the silent alarm. We grabbed all the tables and chairs and stacked them up against the door. We covered the floor in shampoo and water. The security team came back with riot gear and huge cans of pepper spray, but we kept the door closed for over two hours. When they finally got inside, they were slipping all over the place. We just laid down on the floor and put our hands behind our back. I was given thirty days in solitary confinement. But I had to do the right thing. Women are allowed to vote because some woman wanted to vote. The Civil Rights Movement started because Rosa Parks didn’t want to get out of her seat. And next time there’s a game seven of the NBA Finals, I bet they’re going to leave the TV on in Building Six at Rikers Island.”
“All my early memories are of my mom being an alcoholic. We lived in a pretty ghetto area. There was never food in the house. We stole electricity from the neighbors. Things were so bad that my dad got custody of us when I was five, but it wasn’t much better with him. He always chose his girlfriends over us. We moved around a lot. During this time my mom would send me drunk texts. She’d call me a horrible daughter and accuse me of forsaking her. My whole childhood was unstable. And I always craved stability. The more I saw the relationships that my parents had with other people, the more I wanted to be a part of it. I moved back in with my mother last year. I helped her pay the bills. I made sure she had food on the table. I woke her up in the morning to go for job interviews. It was awful. She was drunk all the time. But I knew that she needed me, and that gave me some sort of purpose. I don’t really know what I’m doing with my life. Or who I am. Or what I want to be. But if someone is dependent on me, then at least it’s a reason to stick around. All my relationships have been like that. I’m drawn to people who are insecure. Who need to be wanted. And then I do things to make them feel alone so they rely on me even more. And if they ever try to pull away, I use my feelings to make them feel guilty. It’s pretty toxic behavior. But I learned from the best.”
“I’m a singer and songwriter. And a bartender. And a babysitter. On weekends I host dinner parties for $65 a plate. And I make soap to sell online. And candles. And tea baths. And hair conditioner. And shampoo. Basically I’m broke. And I need a vacation. But I’m on the move. And I’m not stopping until somebody writes me a check for some of my music.”
“There were moments we had hope. At one point he took this trial drug that magically melted his cancer away. But despite the emotional swings, he only ended up living for sixteen months—which was exactly the initial prognosis. Our three kids are still in high school. Everything is uncertain right now. It’s like I’m twenty years old again but without the excitement. The only way I’ve been able to cope is by not stopping. I couldn’t control my husband’s death, but I can make sure my kids don’t suffer in any other part of their lives. We still get together with friends. We still plan things. I bought us expensive Broadway tickets on Father’s Day. And afterward we went to the horse track, which was his favorite thing to do. The homework is still getting done. College applications are getting filled out. So I don’t have time for a meltdown. People think I’m doing better. But honestly, life doesn’t seem good anymore. It’s all so unfair. Everything just comes to a screeching halt and you weren’t done yet. I wasn’t done having a husband. My kids weren’t done having a Dad. So nothing really excites me anymore. But I’ll still decorate for Christmas. And we’ll still go to Disney World in June. Because I never want the kids to think that they’re not enough. Not long after my husband’s death, my son saw me crying, and asked: ‘Aren’t we enough to make you happy?’ That broke my heart. I decided that I’m never going to let them feel that way again.”
“I’ve wanted to go into construction since high school. I used to help my dad out all the time. Everything in our house we built ourselves. But my teachers tried to steer me down a different path. They’d encourage me to ‘figure things out.’ They’d say: ‘Why don’t you do this?’ or ‘Why don’t you do that?’ But I chose construction because it’s what I like to do. I got my union card at eighteen. The pay isn’t bad. I get benefits. It feels good to be young and working every day. But I see all these advertisements on the subway, and they basically say: ‘If you want to be successful, you have to go to college.’ All my friends went to college. Some of them have liberal arts degrees that I didn’t even know existed. A couple more dropped out. The ones who graduated can’t find jobs and have a lot of student debt. But they still look at me like I’m on the wrong path. When I tell them I can help them get a job in construction, they always say the same thing: ‘Why would we want to do that?’”
"I lived in chaos for a long time, but I’ve been sober for thirty years. And I’ve got a tremendous amount of gratitude for that. Right now I have no money, no job, and no man. But I’ve never been happier. Because my only addictions are chocolate ice cream, feeling good, and gossip.”
“We normally spent time together on Sundays. Because that was the only day he wasn’t drunk. We’d watch football together. I could name every player in the NFL. Then he’d take me out to the backyard and have me throw footballs through a tire. He wanted speed and accuracy. He said he didn’t want me throwing like a girl. He showed me how to use my hips to get extra power. On weeknights he’d usually come home and pass out in the living room. But if he’d been drinking hard liquor, he’d get angry. That’s when I’d go up to my room and put on my headphones. I’d listen to Alice Cooper or Black Sabbath and turn up the volume. But I started to notice a pattern. The yelling would get louder and louder until it suddenly stopped. And that’s how I knew the beating had begun. The next morning my mother would have bruises or fractures or missing teeth. She’d always give me some lame excuse about falling down the stairs. But I knew what was happening. And for years I had this rage building inside of me. Then one night, I finally took off my headphones. I went downstairs and caught him in the act. I ripped the phone off the kitchen wall and threw it as hard as I could at his head. Right through the tire hole. He woke up on the floor, called me a terrible daughter, and never touched my mother again.”
“Everyone is at war, except for me. One uncle is fighting with the other. My aunt’s not talking to Grandma. Grandma isn’t talking to anyone. She said that nobody’s coming to her house this year. Christmas is cancelled. I guess it’s always been like this. But now everyone’s old enough that they don’t have to pretend for the kids anymore. All of it’s out in the open. I miss the ignorance of childhood. When we’d all go to church, cook a big dinner, gather in a circle to read the Polar Express, and I wouldn’t notice that the adults were talking to the children more than each other.”
“I was working as a prep cook at a BBQ joint in Harlem. I got off work early one day, and I discovered my wife with another man. That was the beginning of all this. I’d been with her for twenty-one years. I was devastated. I got right back on the bus and headed back to the city. I went straight to the bars on 42nd Street. I got wasted every day. I lost my wallet, my phone, my contacts. I didn’t want to do nothing. I just said ‘F it.’ I’ve been out on the streets for eight months. When it’s time to rest, I find a place to sleep. But I spend most of my time here on this block. These are the best people on this block. I’ve never experienced so many good people in my life. Some of them help me out every single day. They say: ‘What are you doing out here? We’ve never met anyone like you.’ Lily and her daughter brought the whole family to meet me on Thanksgiving. I felt like a celebrity. Then there’s Cheryl with the glasses who just walked by a couple minutes ago. Love her. John and his wife, love them too. David and Michael are the best. And what’s up to my man Sean from the beauty parlor. Shout out to T and Marianne. So many good friends on this block. But they aren’t going to see me much longer because I found a program that’s going to give me a place to stay, and a job cleaning the streets. I’m done with this life. I don’t belong here. And I know my grandkids miss Grandpa. So if you don’t see me here soon, you can say: ‘He’s done it! He’s gone!’ But I’m going to shock everybody. Cause I’m coming back with Christmas cards.”
“Back in college they called me Mailbox Head. Because my head was pretty big. Mailbox Head was a little bit reckless. I didn’t really have a plan in life back then. I drank too much. I threw illegal parties on campus. I climbed abandoned bridges. One time I broke my tailbone because I thought it’d be fun to make a toboggan out of a beer banner. The wild behavior carried over into the first few years of my marriage. But when I was 27, my daughter was born. Three months later I went hiking with my buddies, and I started to climb a cliff without ropes. And I got about eighty feet up, and I couldn’t get any higher. But I also couldn’t get down. I was so desperate that I was about to jump. I kept thinking about my daughter. Somehow my friend talked me down, and I ended up surviving. But that was the end of Mailbox Head.”
“When my kid was twelve years old, I told him: ‘There are three things that are bullshit in this world: Santa Claus, professional wrestling, and politics.’ Yet people get so emotional about politics. They’re always spouting sound bites from their favorite cable channel. It’s so boring. There’s no creativity. Nothing but sound bites. Then on Election Day, my newsfeed is filled with people posting smug pictures about how they voted. Like it really matters. In the end, the people with money are still going to be calling the shots. Nothing matters. But I guess it makes people feel like their life isn’t meaningless if they’re spouting off on Facebook. I hardly ever post anything. My profile picture is Uncle Sam and my cover image is an eagle shitting on him.”
“There was a permanent dark cloud in the house. It was abuse in every way. Mental. Physical. Sexual. It was permanent fear. Whenever my father was home, I just locked myself in my room and tried to be as quiet as possible. My mother and I finally escaped when I was six, but the abuse stayed with me. I didn’t make any friends at school. I couldn’t trust anyone. It was an open wound. But when I was fourteen, my mom told me that we could do something about it. She asked me if I’d be willing to testify. And I agreed. The trial happened two years later at my father’s military base. I hadn’t seen him in ten years. The lawyers told me I didn’t have to be in the courtroom when I testified, but I felt like I needed to face him. Just to show that I wasn’t afraid anymore. He was already seated when I walked in the room. I put my hand on the Bible and looked right at him. For a moment, I felt a stroke of fear wash over me. Like I was a kid again. But I set it aside and gave my testimony. It felt like a huge weight had been lifted off my shoulders. He was sentenced to ten years in prison. I’ve moved on with my life. I don’t think about him. I’ve grown to look like him, but I’m not him. Even if someone tells me I’m him-- I’m not him. I’m me. I’ve lived my entire life to not be him.”
“It’s our anniversary today. We always talk about how lucky we are to have found our person. I wasn’t even supposed to go to the bar that night. My friends and I were going to a golf tournament the next morning, so we wanted to get some sleep. But at the last minute we decided to grab a quick drink. My buddies were doing their thing, so I decided to take a lap around the bar. And I noticed one girl that was just glowing. I’m pretty sure that she was sitting right under one of the bar lights. I just had to go for it. I walked right up to her. I said something like: ‘I want to take this opportunity to introduce myself to you.” After that I was grasping at straws. I kept trying to find a common denominator. But the best I could come up with was that she was in the same sorority as my friend’s cousin. Somehow we ended up talking for the next fifteen minutes. The bar was so loud that we had to lean in to talk to each other. At one point we actually touched cheeks. And my buddies are gonna tear me apart for this, but I just remember thinking that she had the softest face. I gave her my number at the end of the conversation. I wasn’t really expecting to hear from her. But the next day she told her mom the story, and her mom said: ‘Give him a call. You don’t have to marry him.’”
“My dad does two jobs. Sometimes he does fire fighter. And sometimes he does police officer and fights crimes for the city by using smarts and helping people. He says that the bad guys don’t always mean to steal, but they feel like they have to because their families are poor. But if they sell drugs and make people sick then my dad will have to really arrest them for real. I had an idea that one day I’m going to send notes to the bad guys and tell them not to do crimes anymore. Then my dad can hand out the notes every time he fights a crime. I'm going to say: ‘Dear bad guys, if you stop doing crimes, then you’ll have a better life and a better family. And people will start to notice that you’re being a good guy and you’ll have a lot more friends. And then everyone will help you and come visit you and you’ll start to feel really proud of yourself for being nice and having a nice family.’”
“We moved from Brazil three years ago. We love Thanksgiving. We cook everything. But we’re still learning many things about the American culture. Back home everyone likes to hug and kiss on the cheek. It communicates that you care about someone. But here it is different. My friend tried to give me a Thanksgiving handshake at the gym today. But I went in for a Thanksgiving hug. And he only gave me a Thanksgiving half-hug. A few months ago I was called into Human Resources, and they said: ‘Mr. Mauricio, no more hugging at the office. It is making people uncomfortable.’ So I learned my lesson that day. I came home and told the children: ‘Be careful not to touch your classmates.’”
“We’ve been boyfriend and girlfriend for just over two months. We met at camp. We didn’t talk to each other much at camp. But then we decided to talk more after camp. I go to boarding school, so this is the first time we’ve seen each other for five weeks. But we talk a lot on the phone. And we’ll help each other if we’re having a rough day. This week I had an AP US History Exam. I studied all the wrong stuff. I thought there’d be a lot more questions on the War of 1812. But instead there were a ton of questions about The American Revolution. So I was pretty depressed. But she texted me and said: ‘You tried your best. It’s all you can do.’ Then we talked about it all night until I went to bed. And it just felt really nice to have somebody to make you feel better.”
“My wife urged me to take this little trip to New York so that I can clear my head. It’s just for two days. But my leash has been so short lately that it feels like an eternity. Part of me definitely died when our daughter was born. I was always a free spirited person. I traveled a lot. I never had a boss. I had all the choices in the world. But a lot of that disappeared in order to make things possible for my daughter. I watch her during the day. And I’m not mad about it. This is the happiest time of my life. It would be great if my daughter was here right now. It’d be so fun to watch her run around the park. But I’d also be worried about her safety. And the diaper bag. And the car seat. And the stroller. And our next meal. And our next place to stay. There’s always a flickering flame of worry that doesn’t go away. Back home we live by the beach. And if my wife ever senses that I’m getting overwhelmed, she tells me to go jump in the ocean. And that resets me for a few days. It’s all I need. I just need a little space to be me. Because it can be so easy to get lost in helping a new person become someone.”
“I’ve got a stepson living with us at home. He came over from the Ukraine when he was eighteen. He was OK in the beginning. I took him to some places. We did some things. But now he’s twenty-six. And he’s still there. His mom does everything for him. She cooks, cleans, does his laundry—everything but wipe his butt. He just stays in his room and reads his books. It’s not that he’s a bad kid. He doesn’t drink or do drugs. But he’s just always there. When I come home from work I want to relax. I want to forget about my day. I don’t want to listen to his loud voice. And I don’t want him standing in the kitchen when I’m trying to cook. I swear he steps in front of me on purpose. And don’t even get me started on the bathroom. This kid takes actual baths. A normal guy takes a fucking shower, but not my stepson. Hour long baths.”
“There was a program in San Francisco where they’d come into public schools and teach movement. They’d look for kids with potential and give them scholarships to dance school. They visited my school in third grade. And I guess they saw something in me, because they provided two free ballet classes per week. I didn’t really like it at first. But one night I went to see The Nutcracker, and it inspired me to become a dancer. I enrolled in a serious ballet school, and by the age of thirteen I was dancing five days a week. Then six days a week. The school started to get really competitive as we got older. Everybody wanted to be a soloist. Kids would come to the school from all over the world. Some of them were ‘bunheads.’ All they did was dance and watch tapes. But most of us were more balanced. Ballet is extremely rigid, so if you have the opportunity to have fun, you take it. I started drinking a lot. And doing a lot of drugs. It was hard to hide. I’d come to class late and tired. I ended up dropping out of regular high school. The dance school never approved of that decision, but I always hated studying. Personally I don’t think I ever lost my edge. I was just driven in ballet and partying at the same time. They kicked me out of the school when I turned twenty. I knew it was coming, because that’s the age when you either go to college or join a dance company. But neither of those were options for me, so I just quit completely. That’s when the dancing stopped. But the partying kept going.”
“Being six is so hard. I have to go to school, and do math, and do a lot of words, and spell things, and take tests every Friday, and exercise, and play games that I don’t want to play. And mom says we’re going to have another baby soon, so it’s going to be crazy. We wanted a girl but we got a boy. I don’t even know what I’m going to do. I already have one brother who hits too much and goes everywhere without permission.”
“We’ve been together five years. I wanted a marriage, a family, the whole thing. But he wasn’t ready for a child. So I think he was hoping I’d end the pregnancy. He claims I took control of his life by keeping the baby. He’s not the type of person to abandon his child, so he thinks I forced his hand. At first it seemed like he was going to make the most of it. He told all his friends about the pregnancy. He took me out to eat. We had a little vacation. But that changed quickly. There was no stomach rubbing. No asking how I felt. He started going out a lot, and stopped kissing me goodbye. Our son is seventeen months now. We still live under the same roof, but that’s about it. There’s no physical intimacy. Very little communication. He’s always great with our son. They play together and have a great time. But there’s no ‘three of us.’ We never go anywhere together. Or if we do, the conversation is awkward and surface level. I try talking to him. I tell him: ‘If you hate me or resent me, just let me know.’ But he says: ‘Quit forcing things. Let it become what it’s going to be.’ But it’s been eighteen months and it hasn’t become anything. He never wants to talk about our relationship. I know that I should leave him, but I just don’t have the courage. I keep hoping something will change. Because I always wanted the experience of raising a child together.”
“He was the RA in my freshman dorm. His nickname was ‘Rock.’ He was blonde and skinny and made legendary mix tapes for the dance parties. We never talked much in college, but we became good friends when we reconnected at a reunion. The event was eighties themed. There were a lot of Talking Heads cover songs, and we danced all night. After that we started talking every day. Even though we live on different coasts, we’d find different ways to connect. He’d create scavenger hunts for me. He’d send me on missions to find obscure books and records. And we began making mix tapes together. Both of us come from research backgrounds, so we take our mix tapes very seriously. MMTR is our acronym for the meaning of music: ‘Magic, Meditation, Therapy, Reunion.’ So there’s a lot of MMTR mix tapes: ‘MMTR I,’ ‘MMTR II,’ ‘MMTR III,’ ‘MMTR 80’s,’ ‘MMTR 90’s.’ Then there’s ‘Clan McJangle,’ which is nothing but Scottish Pop. Then we’ve got another called ‘Buzz Gems,’ which is nothing but guitar songs under three minutes that alternate decades as you go down the playlist. Our mix tapes hold us together. Lately we’ve been working on a business together. And if we ever get too frustrated, we just put on our headphones, choose a mix tape, and hit play at the exact same time.”
“I sold phone covers back in Ghana, but it wasn’t going anywhere. So I came to South Africa to see if I could change my life. I tried to switch over to the clothing business. I knew how to sew, so I decided to give it a shot. But things are even worse than before. I can stand here all day and not get a single customer. I’ve been at it for three years, and I don’t even know why I’m still making an effort. I should have a wife by now. And a house. And kids. But I have nothing. How can I meet someone when I can’t even provide for myself? Recently I fell in love with a woman. She sells food around here. We used to talk every day and night. We bathed together, and slept together, and prayed together. She’d give me smiles and kisses. I didn’t have much, but I gave her what little I had. For once I was finally happy. Then she came over to my house one evening, and saw that I didn’t have anything. No radio. No television. Nothing. And she pretended like everything was OK. She acted like it didn’t bother her. But two weeks later she broke off contact. She never said it was because I don’t have money. But it’s because I don’t have money. Sometimes I think I should just kill myself.”
“I used to work as a producer at a media company. It was one of those cultures where you worked until you had nothing left to give. My boss’s voice would be the first thing I heard every morning. He’d phone me at 5 AM, asking ‘Have you done this? Have you followed up with that?’ He’d put me down. He’d shout at me during meetings. I can tell you the exact type of tile in the office because I spent so much time looking down. And I wasn’t allowed to grow. I wasn’t allowed to do anything on the creative side. I could only handle the budgets. Once I asked him if I could leave early one day to take a course in art direction, and he said: ‘What makes you think you could succeed at something like that?’ That’s when I finally quit. I freelanced for a while. And the more distance I got from the job, the more I realized that I’d allowed myself to be pigeonholed. I wanted to do something creative. I started trying to save money to attend the New York Film Academy, but it was so expensive that I decided to put all that money into gear instead. And for the past couple months, I’ve been making short documentaries about people. I’ve made about twenty of them so far. I let the person use the video however they’d like. I’m not sure what will come of it, and I’ve only got a couple months of savings left, but for the first time in my life I feel like I’m using all of my talents. And I’ve never had this much fun.”
“My first job in film was as a trainee on a feature. I think it was called ‘Gums and Noses.’ I cleaned the toilet, swept, made tea— things like that. All I ever got was money for transportation, which was fine for me. I just wanted to be on a film set. But with two weeks left of filming, there was a bit of a disaster in the camera department. A trainee blew up an HD monitor by plugging it into the wrong hole. Which was a shame, but it was great for me because I always wanted to be a cinematographer. When I heard them say they needed a replacement, I raised my hand and said: ‘Me, me, me!’ So that’s how it started. And it never stopped. The camera department can be a weird place. It’s all white and male. And it’s a bit like boot camp. A lot of the guys are mean. They don’t like being approached by subordinates. And if you make a mistake, they’ll scream at you. A lot of the guys act like they’re curing cancer instead of making beautiful pictures. But I had thick skin. So I moved up quickly. Recently I DP’ed one of the most popular shows in South Africa. And I run my department a little differently. It’s much more chill. I think we should all share our knowledge. Nobody should be afraid to make mistakes or feel embarrassed to ask questions. And one trainee should always be a girl. It doesn’t matter if she’s studied or not, as long as she’s keen.”
“I grew up thinking that it was a good thing to rob the white man. Everyone fought injustice in their own way. But in my neighborhood, we opposed the government by breaking into houses and robbing people. But in 1994 we were told: ‘Democracy is coming. Apartheid is ending. It’s time to learn a trade.’ So I listened. I did everything I was supposed to do. I’ve worked in construction for the past twenty-five years. I started my own company. I followed all the procedures. But nothing has come of it. The government always talks about empowerment. They make a big show of letting small businesses compete for contracts. But the jobs always get awarded to the same few people. If the government gave me work, it would empower me. Then I could empower other people. I could hire employees and teach them plumbing, and carpentry, and cabinets. I could purchase a brick making machine, and hire women to mix cement. But right now I can’t even afford a printer for my office. Everything is hand to mouth. I had high hopes when apartheid ended. But I’ve been building houses for twenty-five years, and I’m still living in a shack.”
“My dad moved us from Congo when I was a teenager. I wasn’t given a choice in the matter. I didn’t know anyone. I couldn’t speak English. And for a while I had an identity crisis. I felt like my skin was too dark and my build was too muscular. Other kids were telling me that I looked like a boy. I got bullied a lot. I didn’t have any friends. I began to feel depressed. Then one weekend I got invited to a party at a boy’s house. I was excited to go. But when I got there, it was nothing but drunk people. Everyone was passing around a joint. And when it got to me, the boy said: ‘Trust me, you’ll love it.’ So I tried it. And I did love it. Next thing you know, I was going out every weekend. I started drinking heavily. I was high all the time. My grades began to drop. But I was also getting cooler. I was never alone anymore. I was hanging out with popular people. We all hyped each other up, so it was easy to ignore the consequences of our behavior. But whenever I was alone again, I felt like I didn’t know myself anymore. I was heading down the wrong path. That’s not how I was brought up. So I had to get conscious. I had to be honest about what brings me happiness: writing poetry, reading books, and sometimes being alone. I backed away from the party lifestyle. I became more selfish with my time. The other night I ran into a few of my old friends, and they were a little mad because I hadn’t been around. They said I was acting like I was above it all. But that’s not the case. I’m just at a different stage of my life.”
“I’m studying human rights. It’s a long way off, but one day I’d like to be a lawyer and protect vulnerable populations in Africa. My mother is African but I grew up in France. In high school I went on a humanitarian mission to provide health and education for a village in Senegal. There was no water. There was no electricity. We visited a small orphanage where the children had to beg for their food every day. They had no choice, because if they came back with nothing, they didn’t eat. I cried myself to sleep that night. And when I returned to France, I felt guilty for everything: for living where I live, for having a family, for growing up in a rich country with education and healthcare. I didn’t tell many people about my experience. I didn’t want it to seem like a trophy. And I was aware of the irony because France colonized Senegal. But that trip opened my eyes to the opportunities I’d been taking for granted. It made me appreciate the choices that I have in life. And since those choices are a privilege, I want to use them to help other people.”
“I started bodybuilding after my chemotherapy. At first it was just a way to get healthy again. But I discovered I was good at it. I started winning competitions. And I got hooked. My boyfriend didn’t like it. He thought it made me less desirable. But the worse our relationship got, the more I focused on working out. It just felt so great to be recognized for something. I was really, really good at it. And the bodybuilding community is so great. They’re some of the least judgmental people because they’re used to being judged all the time. For the first few years I was really self-conscious about my body. But I’ve gotten to the point where the small comments don’t really bother me anymore: ‘ew,’ gross,’ ‘disgusting’-- things like that. I can usually block people out if they can’t type more than a sentence. But occasionally the criticism sinks in. It still hurts when people question my gender. Or my sexuality. And I’ve had some awkward Tinder dates. The last guy said: ‘Holy fuck, you’re bigger than I thought you’d be.’ But despite all this, I’ve gotten comfortable in my own skin. I actually feel more feminine now than I did growing up. I was always skinny. I never had breasts. I didn’t ever feel like a natural woman. But what is natural? Is make-up natural? Or botox? Or fillers? Or breast implants? All of us are flawed. My mask might be different than other people, but we all hide behind something. I just hide behind my muscles.”
“My dream is to create an incubator of sorts. It can be difficult for start-ups to get funding in South Africa, so I’m trying to build a platform that connects investors and entrepreneurs. I’ve been working on it full time for about a year now. But the idea hasn’t taken off as quickly as I’d hoped. Don’t get me wrong-- I’m still on the grind. I’m still having meetings and trying to put together deals. I’m telling myself that no matter what, I’m going to figure this out. But if I’m being absolutely honest with you, it’s not looking promising. I’ve got about two or three months of runway left. The bank has been calling me every day because of the credit card. And my car just broke down, which will probably eat up twenty percent of my remaining reserves. My options are running out. It’s a lot of pressure, but I’m trying to focus on the bright side. I made it a whole year. We built the initial platform and had a few users. And I’ve moved forward as a person. I’ve gained a lot of new insights. I’ve grown my network. Experienced people have told me that I’m working on an important problem. And that validation means more than money. So even if this particular business fails, I’ll try again. But next time I’ll come back at a better angle.”
“The crime around here is out of control. It’s not even safe to walk down the street. People are snatching bags and phones in broad daylight. And it’s even more dangerous when the sun goes down. It’s bad for business. Our customers are being scared away. The police aren’t doing anything, so we’re forced to take matters into our own hands. Recently one of my customers had his car broken into. While I was repairing his shoe, we heard glass shatter. And we saw three guys running away with his laptop computer. I chased one of them down, caught him by the shirt, and began to beat him. I made him call his brothers and tell them he was about to be killed. Sure enough, they brought back the laptop. So I let him go. But the police came to my store the next day, and told me that I shouldn’t have taken matters into my own hands. They said next time I’d go to jail. But what am I supposed to do? Let my customers be robbed? Soon we won’t have any customers left. If police aren’t willing to stop the crime, we must do it ourselves.”
(2/2) “Mom tried her best to pay for flight school, but we kept running out of money. I’d have to drop out for a few weeks, and since flying involves so much muscle memory, it would take me a while to get back on track. So one day I bought a stack of magazines and newspapers. I went through every page and cut out the advertisements. Then I opened my pantry and wrote down every brand I could find. I sent all of them letters, asking for help. Almost everyone said ‘no.’ But I did receive an amount from a grocery store called Pick-n-Pay. And Breitling sent me a brand new watch to raffle. That was a huge break. I sold six hundred raffle tickets. Things were going so well. African Pilot Magazine promoted the raffle for free. A man from Australia bought 100 tickets. But then I got a letter from the Lottery Board ordering me to end my raffle. They said it was illegal. I tried to explain that I was raising money for my education, but they didn’t care. I was so disappointed. I’d have to sit out another year of flight school. But when I called everyone to explain the situation, nobody would accept their money back. They told me to keep it! It was enough to keep me in the air for months. Then around Christmas that year, one of my mentors invited me to eat lunch at the airport. When I stepped out of the car, everyone who had ever helped me was there. They all started clapping. And somebody handed me the phone. A person on the other end said: ‘You’re live on 94.7, and we’re going to pay for your entire education!’ That was nearly four years ago. I just got my license last week. My plan is to fly for South African Airlines, but first I want to do some teaching. I want to visit schools in black neighborhoods. I want all the kids to see what an African female pilot looks like.”
(1/2) “In tenth grade we were given an assignment to shadow a professional in the workplace. I wanted to be a doctor at the time, so I emailed some hospitals but never got a response. Luckily one of my aunts worked in the back office of South African Airlines, so she invited me to come with her to the airport. I’d never flown on an airplane before. I remember looking out the window at all those big ass planes coming in to land. My aunt could see that I wasn’t interested in the paperwork, so she took me to the crew room. I noticed all the pilots had incredible posture. All their hats were lined up on a shelf. Their jackets were all hanging in a row. And that’s when the bug bit me. I started spending all my holidays there. The pilots were very nice to me. I don’t think they’d ever seen an African female who was so enthusiastic about becoming a pilot. They gave me advice and let me share their simulator time. When I turned eighteen, I visited a flight school and picked up an application. But the costs were too much. My mom said we didn’t have the money, and told me to apply to normal universities. She’d bring me applications, but I kept hiding them under my bed and telling her I got rejected. I found an internship with a glider company, and used my stipend to buy my first pilot’s uniform. I put one stripe on the sleeve—for students. When I came home that night, I think she took me seriously for the first time. She could see her daughter really wanted to fly.”
“I hung out in the streets a lot as a child. But when I was seventeen, my parents died in a minibus crash. It forced me to wake up and work for myself. I got my first job as a cleaner. The boss ordered me around for months. But when it was time to pay me, he refused. It left me in a desperate situation. I was hungry. I needed shelter. So I got frustrated. Some of my friends were stealing cars at the time. They had a special key that could open doors. At first I didn’t want to get involved, but they were living the life I wanted. They had nice cars. They could afford to buy drinks. So when they asked me to come along one night, I agreed. I told myself: ‘If I just go along once, I’ll be alright.’ We stole three cars that night. Everyone got away but me. When I saw the police lights in my rearview mirror, I started crying immediately. I knew my life was over. I spent a few years in prison. That’s where I met a social worker named Ms. Palesa. She was near retirement. And when she heard my story, she invited me to come work at her house when I got released. I painted for her. I cleaned. I worked in the garden. Not only did she pay me, but she treated me like her child. She bought me clothes. She encouraged me to learn a trade. Ms. Palesa only lived for a few more years, but she set me on the right path. Every friend that I stole cars with that night is either dead or in jail. But I work every day, and I never committed another crime. ”
“I carried the burden of doing well from very young in life. My father died early, so things were never very stable growing up. I lived in about ten different places. So from an early age, I decided that I was going to change the narrative. I’d use my gifts and talents to create stability for my family. I did well in academics. I took leadership positions in school. And when I was thirteen years old, I set a goal of becoming the President of South Africa. I always felt destined to achieve something great. But most of all, I wanted to be an amazing mother. For the longest time everything was going to plan. But last year I got pregnant. We were both just beginning our careers. We’d only been dating for a few months. So we decided that we’d try again when the time was right, and I ended the pregnancy. That’s when things began to fall apart. The relationship came to an end. I went through a long stretch of unemployment. After a lifetime of accomplishing my goals, everything stopped working. And I just hadn’t prepared myself for the emotional trauma of the abortion. I convinced myself that I’d made the wrong decision. I’d spent my whole life planning to be this amazing mother, but when it finally happened, I couldn’t show up for it. I fell into a dark place. And I’ve been struggling with it ever since. But there’s a verse in Jeremiah that God knows us in the womb. And whether you live for a day, or a month, or if you’re never born at all—every life has a purpose. So maybe there was a purpose for that life. It interrupted me. It interrupted all the achievements and goals and forced me to examine my truth. I’ve accepted that mistakes happen. Curveballs happen. And that’s where deep learning occurs. On the child’s due date, my best friend took me on a spa day, and she told me something that helped. She said: ‘Every mother has an instinct. And you were just doing what was best for your child. Maybe the pregnancy wasn’t ended. It was just delayed until you’re ready.’”
“I’m trying to give Mom a chance to do other things. She wants to wash her hair and cook dinner, but the baby started crying. So I brought him outside to see if it would help. We’ve gone about thirty minutes without screaming. We’re from Mozambique. I originally came here to find work as a ceiling installer, but I brought my wife along when we found out she was pregnant. The healthcare is much better in this country. It’s too early for them to go back home because the child was born premature, but I’ll feel safer when they’re gone. It’s too dangerous for them here. South Africa is a good place to work, but they don’t like us being here so much. The abuse mainly comes from other black people. They call us names. They tell us to go home. They attack us because they think we’re stealing their jobs. But I’m just doing what I know. They don’t understand what it’s like in my country. You can’t survive with kids. I’m just making the only choice I have.”
“My younger sister passed away last year from an unexpected stroke. So I’m raising both my daughter and my niece. In our culture, it’s an automatic. It just kicks in. She belongs to me now. I’m a single mother so it’s not easy. There are definitely months when I add up income and expenses and the numbers don’t work. And both of them are thirteen so their moods are all over the place. Today is like this, and tomorrow is like that. But God has given us favor as well. We can afford to share an ice cream. We have shelter. We have food. And after four months of no work, I just found a new management position. So we’ve come a long way. My niece is beginning to heal. Her grades are improving at school. She still speaks of her mother in the present tense, but there’s no more crying at night. And I’ve grown a lot as well. Because more than I want to acknowledge --the struggle has given me meaning. This is my purpose. I have a little family. And we share what little we have.”
“I have nothing to complain about. I’m originally from Sudan. I love it there. So many happy memories. I got so much love from my family because I was the youngest. Since then I’ve lived in five different countries and I’ve enjoyed every single one. I don’t have a partner, but I have plenty of great friends. I don’t have children, but I’m a lovely uncle. I don’t take any medicine. I sleep well. I can walk around. I don’t know what to say. Every time I think about it, I conclude that I’m happy. I wake up smiling. I lived in Germany for several years. And they have these cameras along the highway that photograph you when you’re speeding. I’ve got a huge collection of photos because I love to speed. It’s always just me alone in my car. And I’m smiling in every one of them.”
(7/7) “While I was being interviewed on the radio, Carl Wilkens was attempting an impossible mission. He’d gone to military headquarters, and begged an official to let us transport children out of the orphanage. He wanted to move them to a protected church near the UN Mission. His request was denied because the children were Tutsi. But then a miracle happened. As he was leaving the building, the Prime Minister himself arrived for a meeting. Carl ran up to him and began to plead for the children. The minister told him to slow down and explain himself clearly. Then not only did he grant him permission, but he offered two buses for the transportation. Carl called me and told me to wait at the church. He said he would bring the children to me. I thought it was a suicide mission. There were four hundred people hiding in the orphanage. Many of them were malnourished and looked like fugitives. It was clear they had been hiding out for months. Why would the killers allow them to escape on buses? But it was our only chance, so I came to the church and waited. Carl told me the buses would arrive at 6 PM. But there was no sign of them by 8 PM. It had gotten completely dark. I was losing hope. But suddenly I heard people screaming: ‘Tutsis! Tutsis! Tutsis!’ The buses came around the curve, and pedestrians were chasing behind them. Inside I could see five people piled into every seat. The kids were hanging out the window, screaming: ‘Papa! Papa! Papa!’ Finally all of us were out of danger. We sheltered in the church until the genocide was over, but it didn’t take long. Three days later the capital was liberated. And all of the children had survived.”
(6/7) “After people were discovered in the orphanage ceiling, the militia determined that I was a collaborator. They held a high level meeting and passed a resolution to kill me. I barely slept that night. And the next morning I awoke to my name being called out over the radio. It was the voice of the Minister of Social Affairs, and he was ordering me to report immediately to the radio station. I was paralyzed with fear. I didn’t know what to do. Should I go there and be killed? Or wait for them to come kill me? I felt like locking myself away, but my brother forced me to make a decision. So I decided to drive to the radio station. The station director met me at the entrance, and informed me that I’d be doing a live interview on the radio. It would be broadcast across the nation. He sat me down in front of a microphone. My mind was racing. My hands were trembling, but I did my best to not sound nervous. He started drilling me with questions. He asked why there were so many rumors about the orphanage. He asked if I was keeping any secrets. He asked how many people I was hiding. I steadied my voice. I told him: ‘If I was hiding people, would I have come here to meet you? I have nothing but children. They’re just babies.’ He looked at me for a long time. Then he finally spoke into his microphone: ‘Attention, militia! Damas Gisimba is no longer a suspect.’”
(5/7) "One night I was walking the property when I heard the children screaming. They were saying, ‘Papa! Papa! Papa!’ The screams were coming from inside the office. When I ran to see what was happening, I found that a group of killers had entered the building. There were about fifteen of them. They were wearing camouflage and carrying flashlights. They had already begun to pull young men out of the ceiling. I tried to stop them, but I was hit with the butt of a rifle. The blow fractured my arm. I didn’t dare to speak after that. The killers were already angry. If I annoyed them any more, they might harm the children. Six young men were dragged into the kitchen. They were beaten with pieces of wood that had nails sticking out. The killers were screaming: ‘Where are the others? Where are the others?’ At first the young men were begging for their lives, but their voices grew weak from loss of blood. The children heard everything and kept trying to see what was happening. I kept trying to chase them out of the room. I yelled at them to go back to bed. Eventually the young men were taken out to the bushes. All night they were tortured. I stood in the dark and listened to their voices. We were hiding hundreds of people at that point. I was sure they’d give everyone else away. But they never spoke. Their wives and family members were hiding in the ceiling, so they stayed silent until their deaths. They saved all of us. After the genocide, I built this memorial in their honor.”
(4/7) “The militias would usually grow tired of killing people by 3 PM, and they would rest for the day. That’s when I’d take people out of the ceiling to stretch their legs. I’d circle the property. I’d walk to a nearby pit where they threw dead bodies. I’d listen closely to see if anyone was still alive, and I’d bring any survivors inside the orphanage. During this time I lost all my emotions and feelings. I became numb. It seemed like any moment the militias would kill us, or a bomb would accidentally hit the orphanage. And honestly I was ready for death. It seemed like it would be the best thing for me. My wife was also feeling hopeless. We saw each other for just a few minutes every night. She was busy trying to keep the babies alive. She’d lost so much weight. Her breast milk was gone. And the children were barely alive. They’d lost all of their muscle. They were just skin and bones. And we were almost out of food so I could no longer bribe the killers. One day two men came in a truck asking for one of my employees by name. They pretended that they had a child with them that needed medical treatment. When she walked out to see the child, they pushed her into the truck and drove away. Thankfully I was able to pull a baby out of her arms. They killed her just a few meters from here, but it was too dangerous to recover her body until after the genocide.”
(3/7) “Our most desperate problem was water. The government had cut off our supply. And we were packed so densely that the heat was unbearable. Whenever we brought out jugs of water, one hundred liters would be consumed in less than a minute. After two weeks we’d run out completely. Then one morning I saw a car coming up the road. It had the markings of the Adventist Church. Out stepped a white man with a bulletproof vest. His name was Carl Wilkens. And he was the only American who had remained behind in Rwanda. ‘I heard about you,’ he said. ‘And I’ve come to encourage you.’ I took him around the property. I showed him all the people I was hiding. He could see that I was a nervous wreck. So he began to pray with me. He told me: ‘There is no way a man can survive this. But God will help us through.’ I told Carl that we desperately needed water. Without water we could not even cook our food. So he promised me that he would try to help. After that Carl would drive to the orphanage each week. He’d bring water and milk for the kids. And to this day, I don’t understand where he got it. All of the stores were closed. Carl was the only thing keeping us alive. Every week I was convinced that he would be killed on the journey. The roads were so dangerous. People would shoot out his tires. But every week he showed up with more water.”
(2/7) “Over the next few days, the situation grew worse. Bombs were being dropped all around us. The streets had grown very loud. The killers would chant and scream while they chased people. All of the children were terrified. We couldn’t hide the truth from them because they knew what was going on. Some of the children who were arriving from the outside had witnessed their parents being killed. Even the babies knew how to say: ‘Don’t kill me. I’m not a Tutsi.’ The adolescent boys were especially vulnerable. We hid them in the ceiling. We had no fence around the orphanage back then, so there was nothing to protect us. Just a line of trees. Every day the militias would come looking for targets. I'd meet them here at the entrance and try to bribe them with food. I’d tell them: ‘I know your families are hungry. Take this and go away.’ Luckily I had a shipping container full of porridge, corn, beans, and biscuits. But word spread quickly. The killers told each other: ‘If you tell Damas that you are going to kill his children, he will give you food.’ So more of them began to come. And their demands grew larger. So our food supply ran very low. And the people kept coming. Eventually 400 people were being hidden in the orphanage. We were like sardines in a can. We had no food. No water. No electricity. No life.”
(1/7) “I inherited this orphanage from my father. I was in my twenties at the time. I had other dreams for my life, but the responsibility fell on me. When my father passed away, he begged me: ‘Damas, please don’t abandon the children.’ So I promised him that I never would. When the genocide began in 1994, I’d been managing the orphanage for several years. I was thirty-three. I was newly married. I had a one-year-old child at home. When I heard news of the president’s assassination, I immediately ran to comfort the children. Gunfire had begun to enter the air. We were housing about 65 children at the time. Many of them were Tutsis. I told the staff that nobody was allowed to leave the orphanage. As the day passed, more and more people began arriving. I had a reputation in the community for helping people. So everyone came to me for shelter. Their neighbors had turned against them. Many of them were being chased by killers. I knew that the penalty for sheltering Tutsis was death, but I didn’t have the heart to turn them away. So I invited everyone inside. I thought: ‘We have institutions in this country. The United Nations is here. The danger will be over soon.’”
“It might not seem possible for a nation to heal from genocide so quickly. And some might think that our reconciliation is surface level. But it runs deeper than that. If we were truly a nation playing ‘make believe,’ our progress would have been impossible. Rwanda’s per capita GDP has grown nearly 500% since the genocide. And I understand that economics might seem like a dry subject, but you must consider what it represents. It represents Rwandans working together. And trading together. And trusting each other. It represents a consensus that our best future is a shared one. Without true reconciliation, we’d have never come this far. Do tribes still exist in Rwanda? Of course. There will always be divisions between us. I can’t ask people to forget about these things. But I tell them: ‘Consider the ways that we are a single tribe. We all speak one language. We all have the same culture, and dances, and behaviors. So be proud of who you are. But also be proud of being Rwandan. Because that is something all of us are.”
“There was a huge puzzle after the genocide. How do you pursue justice when the crime is so great? You can’t lose one million people in one hundred days without an equal number of perpetrators. But we also can’t imprison an entire nation. So forgiveness was the only path forward. Survivors were asked to forgive and forget. The death penalty was abolished. We focused our justice on the organizers of the genocide. Hundreds of thousands of perpetrators were rehabilitated and released back into their communities. These decisions were agonizing. I constantly questioned myself. But each time I decided that Rwanda’s future was more important than justice. It was a huge burden to place on the survivors. And perhaps the burden was too great. One day during a memorial service, I was approached by a survivor. He was very emotional. ‘Why are you asking us to forgive?’ he asked me. ‘Haven’t we suffered enough? We weren’t the cause of this problem. Why must we provide the solution?’ These were very challenging questions. So I paused for a long time. Then I told him: ‘I’m very sorry. You are correct. I am asking too much of you. But I don’t know what to ask the perpetrators. ‘Sorry’ won’t bring back any lives. Only forgiveness can heal this nation. The burden rests with the survivors because they are the only ones with something to give.’”
(9/9) “This is a picture of my father before the genocide. He’s surrounded by his Hutu friends. They’re sharing beer. They’re talking. They always viewed him as a good person. They’d even come to our home and flatter us. They’d tell my sisters and me how good of children we were. And that one day we’d marry their sons. Many of these men would later help kill my family. So how am I supposed to trust anyone? Before the genocide, there were doctors taking care of their patients. Priests were taking care of their followers. Neighbors were taking care of each other. But none of that stopped them from killing each other. And now we’re being asked to forgive. Because our president tells us that reconciliation is the only path forward as a nation. And I know that he’s right. So I’m trying my best. I’m spending time with Hutu people. I even found two Hutu elders to mentor my son. I want him to see that Hutus have good hearts. My son even calls them ‘Grandpa.’ So I understand the need for reconciliation. And I’m trying. Christianity has helped me a great deal. But true forgiveness is impossible. My entire family was murdered. How can I possibly forgive on behalf of those who can no longer speak for themselves? It’s just not possible. But I will certainly pretend. Because I’ve seen where vengeance leads.”
(8/9) “There were twelve people in my family before the genocide. I’m the only one who survived. We recovered eight of the bodies. And we buried the bones we were able to find. I didn’t trust anyone after the genocide. Even when I was rescued by the Rwandan Patriotic Front, I wouldn’t take the food I was given. I thought it might be poisoned. So I’d eat raw food from the fields. I was losing so much weight but I didn’t care. People looked at me like I was a statue. They assumed my emotions were frozen. They knew my family was dead, and didn’t want to ask me questions. So I held it all in for decades. Who could I talk to anyway? In a nation of one million victims, how do I begin to tell my story? There’s been too much tragedy for everyone. Some people lost their arms and legs. Other people were raped and given HIV. What makes my story worth telling? Who am I? Why should I ask for sympathy? And who would I even ask? So I never asked anyone. I’ve never asked anyone for a thing. I don’t want anyone to take care of me. I don’t want people to celebrate my birthday. Or cook for me. Or tell me sweet words. I’m fine with giving love. But I can’t accept it. Because I don’t want anything that can ever be taken away.”
(7/9) “I woke up to find that I’d been discovered by a soldier. He dragged me to my feet and led me down the street to this alleyway. He pointed his gun at me, and told me to say goodbye to my life. At that point I felt ready to die. But that’s when Mary came running out of her house. She fell at the soldier’s feet and began pleading with him. ‘Leave this girl for me,’ she said. ‘You’ve killed her entire family. Just leave this one for me. God sent her to me.’ She offered the soldier all of her money. She told him: ‘When the war is over, you can come back and take this girl for a wife.’ And that’s what finally convinced him. He handed me over. Mary took me inside and cooked me food. She gave me a change of clothes. She tried to wash my hair, but it was too thick, so she cut it all off. Then she hid me in the bushes behind her house. I stayed there for weeks. Every night Mary would bring me porridge and water. She gave me a little radio so I could follow the news reports. Each day the rebels were getting closer to our town. Mary would encourage me. She’d tell me that it would all be over soon. And that I’d be rescued. She promised me that I’d survive. And Mary was right. I did survive-- because of her.”
(6/9) “The next morning, I heard people calling my name and I decided to show myself. I was too exhausted to resist. They told me there had been a general pardon for women and children. And all of us who believed the rumor were taken to this place-- the house of a Tutsi widow. I found my mother and sisters when I arrived. They were still alive, but were so weak and depressed that they could barely move. We stayed in this house for two weeks. There were sixteen of us here. Then one night a soldier came and told us that we were scheduled to be executed. My mother urged my younger sisters to run away, but none of them wanted to leave her side. I begged Francine to escape with me. She was the oldest. We had a chance. But she was too tired. She’d been raped a few days earlier. She told me she was ready for death. Eighty soldiers came to the house that night. They were carrying a list with our names. They began grabbing people. During the struggle, I jumped out the window and hid in a tree. My mother was forty-eight years old. Francine was sixteen. Olivia was fourteen. Noella was eleven. Augtavienne was seven. Claudette was four. And Bebe was almost two. I listened to their screams until I fainted.”
(5/9) “On the day I watched my father die, this is the skirt I was wearing. I was only eighteen years old. I completely lost my will to live. I walked down the street like a zombie. I came to this house. The owner wasn’t home at the time because she was busy looting my family’s home. I tried to hide under her bed, but there was another Tutsi man there. He began yelling at me to leave. ‘It’s too small,’ he said. ‘You’ll get us both killed.’ So I ran outside to jump in the toilet, but the killers were already at the door. They dragged the man out from under the bed and killed him before my eyes. They were about to kill me too, but the team leader said he had ‘other plans for me.’ And everyone listened to him because he had a gun. He started leading me toward a plantation. He told me to comply or he’d kill me. He made me lie down on the ground. He unbuttoned his shirt, lay down next to me, and tried to spread my legs. So I grabbed his balls and squeezed as hard as I could. He started trying to punch me. So I squeezed them harder and twisted. He kept writhing around but I didn’t let go until he fainted. Then I began running through the dark. I couldn’t see a thing. I fell into a latrine full of shit, and I remained there all night because I was too tired to move.”
(4/9) “Our family was a top target because my father was so prominent. So when the genocide officially commenced, the killing squads came straight to our home. One of our neighbors peeled away from the group and ran ahead to warn us. He came down our street, screaming at the top of his lungs: ‘Run away!’ They are coming to kill you!’ My mother immediately dropped to her knees and started to pray. My father yanked her off the ground. He told us all to get out. Everyone ran in different directions. I don’t know why we split up, but there was gunfire and screaming all around. I followed my mother and sisters to a nearby plantation. The baby was with us. We stayed there for four days. But I didn’t feel comfortable. All around I could hear people hunting for us. They were calling our names. We needed to find a new place. I begged my mother and sisters to run away with me, but they were too depressed. They didn’t have the energy to move. So I went alone and returned to our house. I was looking for our father. I crouched down in a nearby bush and waited for him to return. Early in the morning a crowd of people came marching over the hill. My father was in the center. He was so tall that I could see his face. They marched him to this very spot, because he’d asked to be killed at his own home. I could see everything from the bush. I closed my eyes. I said: ‘Please God, please change this man. Please make it a different person.’ But when I opened my eyes—it was still his face. I saw everything. And the whole time I was trying to imagine it wasn’t him. But when I opened my eyes, it was always him. They finished him off with machetes. When they finally left, I walked over to look at his body. He was seconds away from death. But he was still moving his head back and forth.”
(3/9) “If you are being hunted, this bush is one of the best places to hide. Every genocide survivor in Rwanda can tell you about this type of bush. It’s full of thorns. But if you crawl on your stomach, you can get inside. And if you can get inside— you can finally take a rest. The best hiding places are always the most dangerous ones. Farms were no good. Everyone who tried to hide on a farm was discovered. Toilets were no good either. Because that’s where they dumped the bodies. You wanted to find a place where the killers were afraid to go. The higher the risk-- the less chance of getting caught. Swamps were one of the most popular choices because there were so many ways to die in there. It was easy to get stuck in the mud and drown. Most of us couldn’t swim. Or the mosquitos could give you malaria. Or you could be killed by a single snakebite. But the worst were the crocodiles. I’d say fifty percent of the people who hid in the swamps were eaten by crocodiles. My brother tried hiding in a swamp. And he actually survived all these things. He made it all the way to the border with Burundi. But then a helicopter dropped fuel from above and set his swamp on fire.”
(2/9) “When the presidential plane was shot down, people began to gossip about the impending genocide. The streets were empty. Nobody was travelling long distances. We started to hear tales of violence. Relatives from other regions would arrive on our doorstep with horror stories. My father came home one day and told us about a Tutsi janitor at the university. He cleaned clothes for the students. That day he’d been tortured to death with his own iron. I grew very depressed during this period. I wanted to be alone all the time. Some nights my family would sleep in a nearby church for safety, but I’d remain in the house alone. I could feel something terrible in the air. Then on April 21st, the genocide officially came to our town. The militia gathered up Tutsi pedestrians in the city center. They brought them to this stadium. There were 200 people in all. They put them in lines. Then they opened the doors and invited the public to fill the seats. The governor was forced to sit in the front row. He had mixed blood and was against the genocide. After the last person was executed, they brought the governor down and killed him too. His body was paraded through the streets. The killers were screaming into an intercom: ‘We’ve killed the governor! Anything is possible! Now let the hunt begin.’”
(1/9) “My father was well respected in the community. He was a university lecturer and a choir member. But he was always working, so my mother was primarily the one who raised us. Her name was Consolee. She had this deep sorrow about her. She was an orphan because her parents had been killed in the 1963 genocide. Whenever we asked her to tell the story of our grandparents, she’d just say: ‘Give it time. Soon you’ll see for yourself.’ I tried to help her as much as I could. The eldest daughter acts like a mother in our culture, so I raised my six younger sisters. They thought I was too strict. They were always saying that I behaved like a nun. But they looked up to me too. And they loved me. Occasionally I’d help to keep them out of trouble. When my sister Francine cut her foot on a bottle, she was terrified to tell our mother because she wasn’t supposed to be barefoot. I helped her conceal the crime by cutting a hole in the bottom of her shoe. At night all my sisters would pile into my bed. They’d beg me to tell them stories. And I always did, until they fell asleep, and I’d carry them into their beds one by one. The youngest was a boy. He always took the longest because I had to rock him to sleep. His name was Edmond Richard, but we called him ‘Bebe.’ He was was 1.5 years old when the genocide began.”
(6/6) “I was given the opportunity to visit Rwanda as part of my internship with the US Senate. I was accompanying an important delegation. But they must have thought I was crazy, because when we arrived in Rwanda, I began speaking to people in the streets. I was convinced that everyone looked like me. I wanted to find members of my family. I wanted to see my old school. I wanted to find my old house. But all I could remember was the location of my grandmother’s house because it had been so close to the airport. So that’s where we went. We knocked on the door. I didn’t reveal my identity. When I asked the current resident if he knew about me, he told me that I had been killed. But then he said that some of my family was still alive. He told us that my sister was working at a nearby market. So we decided to drive there. The sun was going down. At this point I was sure that I’d lost my mind. Because we drove by a playground, and I saw a little boy that looked exactly like me. I even took his photo. I had no idea that he was my brother. When we arrived at the market, it was almost completely dark. But I saw my sister. And she saw me. She recognized me immediately because of the scar on my forehead. Our brother had given me this scar when we were toddlers. He didn’t survive the genocide. When my sister saw me, we embraced. We both started crying. And she told me everything that happened while I was gone. And I won’t share the details, because those aren’t my stories to tell. But she gave me the biggest news of all. I remember picking up the phone, and immediately calling Anne Peterson. I told her: ‘Mom, you’re not going to believe this. But I just found my mother.’”
(5/6) “During high school I got a lot of counseling. I began to process what had happened to me. I remember in tenth grade we had an English teacher who used to tell us to look in the mirror every morning and say: ‘I’m good and I’m beautiful.’ But I would always add: ‘And I’m extremely lucky.’ I’d look at myself closely and try to recognize my mother. I started reading a lot of books. One of them was called Anne of Green Gables, about an orphan girl who was different. I decided that I was going to be like Anne and not let my bad luck ruin my life. I went to college at Washington State. I got an internship to work in the US Senate. I even dreamed about one day becoming Secretary General of the United Nations. But it was during this time that I also began to meet other people who’d escaped from Rwanda. I listened to their stories. And I began to realize the full context of what happened during the genocide. I read about it obsessively. I learned that the world had abandoned Rwanda. The United Nations may have saved me, but they failed everyone else. One million people were left to die. At first I felt angry. Then the anger turned into guilt. Why had I survived? For the longest time I didn’t even want to tell my story. Because I didn’t want to give the United Nations any credit. I didn’t want my story being used to put a positive spin on the situation. I felt confused and conflicted. But then at the age of twenty-one, I was given an opportunity to return to Rwanda.”
(4/6) “After a year we were chosen for resettlement in the United States. As soon as we arrived, I was separated from my grandmother. She was put in a nursing home, and two months later she passed away. It was the first time I’d cried since I left Rwanda. She was all I had left. I lived with my uncle for awhile but he was very abusive. He treated me like a maid. So I was removed from the home and put into foster care in Boise, Idaho. But that was also a bad situation. I was on the verge of running away. And I’m pretty sure my social worker informed my school. Because my art teacher started asking me about my plans. Her name was Anne Peterson. She was one of those teachers that you could talk to about anything. So I answered all her questions. I told her my story. And I started bragging about my plan to take care of myself. I think she decided: ‘Absolutely not.’ Because that’s when she chose to become my Mom. Oh my God, it was amazing. Ms. Peterson lived in a big, beautiful house. I was the only child there. I had my own room. It was safe. I didn’t have to worry about surviving. Mom took care of everything. She would wake me up to go to school every day. She always made sure I had lunch. She took me out to eat at restaurants. It was amazing. I was already fifteen years old. But for the first time in years, I felt like a kid.”
(3/6) “The plane took us to a refugee camp in Nairobi, Kenya. It would be our home for the next year. When I finally learned what was going on, I became one hundred percent convinced that my mother had been killed. Other refugees were telling me stories. Many of them had lost their entire families. My uncle told me that everyone in our neighborhood had been captured, and he was almost positive that my mother was dead. Surely if my mother was alive, she would have come for me. My grandmother’s house was not far from our home. So I accepted the truth. But I didn’t have much time to think about it. Because we had to fight for survival in the refugee camp. My grandmother was paralyzed and couldn’t chew hard food. So I’d spend my days trying to find her things to eat. I’d negotiate with people for their eggs and bananas. I spent the rest of my time by her side. She couldn’t move so I had to keep the flies away. But it wasn’t all bad. I made friends with a few of the other kids in camp. And I remember one time we stole money from the adults. We snuck out of the camp and bought French fries from a roadside shop. They were horrible quality. They came in a little plastic bag. But at the time I remember thinking they were the best thing I’d ever tasted.”
(2/6) “We stayed in the house for two nights. On the third morning a neighbor warned us that the killing groups were coming our way, so we decided to leave without packing anything. We were fortunate because my grandmother lived right next to the airport. Her house backed right up to the airstrip, and it was one of the few places in the city still under the protection of the United Nations. So my uncle cut a hole in the fence, and we began running toward some old trucks. We couldn’t run very fast because we were pushing my grandmother in her wheelchair. On the way I lost one of my yellow flip-flops. I remember thinking: ‘My mother is going to kill me when I see her again.’ So I tried to turn back, but the adults screamed at me to keep running. Finally we reached one of the old trucks and climbed beneath it. We stayed under that truck for a week. The UN knew we were there, but they left us alone. Occasionally I’d run out and ask the soldiers for food. There was one soldier in particular who always gave me biscuits and sardines. He felt sorry for me because I was so small. And when the UN finally evacuated, he came and got us. They put us in the back of a cargo plane with some containers. Nobody explained anything to me. I was cold. I was hungry. I was tired. All I wanted to do was go home and see my mother.”
(1/6) “I was only ten years old at the time so I don’t remember much. Nobody explains things to you when you’re a child. I was never told that I was different. Or that some people wanted to kill us. My mother basically raised me by herself, but it wasn’t an unhappy childhood. I do remember feeling afraid sometimes. I remember occasionally being kept home from school. And I remember not being allowed to play freely in the streets. But these things were never fully explained to me. When the genocide began, I was visiting my grandmother. It was a school holiday. I’d made good grades that semester, so my mother had bought me a pair of yellow flip-flops as a reward. I was obsessed with them. I remember waking up that morning and realizing something strange was going on. I could hear gunshots outside and people screaming. My grandmother told me to stay inside the house. She’d recently had a stroke and was confined to a wheelchair, so it was just me and her alone in the room. Eventually I got bored and decided to sneak outside to see what was happening. All the streets were empty except for young boys with machetes. That’s when my uncle came over, and I overheard him telling one of the maids that it was extremely dangerous outside. He said that all of us might be killed.”
(3/3) “When I woke up, I found myself lying alongside a very deep pit. It was full of bodies. My stepfather was standing over me. Somehow he had learned about the attack, and had come with his bodyguards to rescue me. He picked me off the ground. I was barely conscious. When we returned home, my stepfather called the government to complain about what had happened. But he was told to watch his back. He was told that our family was no longer under protection. My mother begged me stop helping people. She told my bodyguards to not let me leave the house. But by that time the Rwandan Patriotic Front was getting very close to our village. The fighting grew very intense. My family packed everything and fled toward the border with Congo. Four of my sisters were killed on the journey. I remained behind with the seventy people. Our bodyguards were gone. We were helpless. We had no guns. We just prayed the rebels would liberate us as soon as possible. I knew the killing groups would be coming to my home, so I gathered all the remaining biscuits and water. I took everyone to the house of someone who had already been murdered. It seemed like the safest place to be. I closed them inside and padlocked the door. Then I finally ran off to reunite with my family. I learned later that everyone in that house was rescued. Only four of the seventy lost their lives. And almost all of them are still alive today. We remain friends. We’re still neighbors. They bring me gifts. I see them in the streets almost every day, and whenever we meet, they show me their love.”
(2/3) “The killings were being encouraged by the national radio station. Every day they would announce how many people had been killed. They’d announce the location of the killings. And they’d give thanks to those who were doing the killing. One morning I was sitting in my bedroom, and I heard an announcement on the radio: ‘Everyone is being killed in Gatobotobo except for those under the protection of the Felix family.’ I knew then that we were in danger. Not long after the announcement, the Minister of Internal Security came to our village for a meeting. It took place on a hill overlooking our property. He could see everything that was happening in our compound. When he left the meeting, his convoy began driving toward our home. The minister was riding in a truck full of armed soldiers. When he passed by me in the street, the truck slammed on the brakes. All my bodyguards ran away and I was left completely alone. My neighbors began to gather around. They were laughing and applauding and saying, ‘This is the guy who was stopping the killings.’ The minister walked over to me. He pushed me on the ground and leaned over my body. He was covered with sweat. His eyes were wide. There was dried spit on the edges of his lips. He had the face of the devil. He took off his belt and began beating me until I lost consciousness.”
(1/3) “The genocide was an opportunity to get rich. Murdering people was the quickest way to accumulate wealth. We were given permission from the government to seize the property of anyone we killed. We were told it was our god given right. But I never felt the temptation. My family owned a very big supermarket. I had my own car. When the killings began in 1994, I had a scholarship to study in Greece and I was just waiting to begin university. My stepfather was Vice President of our region, so we had four bodyguards in the house. These guys were highly trained with automatic weapons. They became good friends of mine. I’d take them to the bar every night. I’d drive them around and buy them anything they wanted. They were also good human beings. One night over drinks we discussed the genocide, and all of us decided: ‘We’re going to put an end to this in our neighborhood.’ The next morning I woke up to my neighbor screaming. I looked out the window and saw that he’d been surrounded by a mob with machetes, and was bleeding badly from the head. I’d been friends with him since childhood. So I sent my bodyguards to save him. The machetes were no match for our guns. Word spread quickly after that. Tutsi families came to our compound seeking refuge. I took long walks with my bodyguards every morning, looking for people to save. We drove to surrounding farms and searched the fields for survivors. At one point we had seventy people under our protection. Nobody challenged us. I was young and cocky. I thought we were untouchable.”
“My father was a talented engineer. He could fix any type of truck, and he used his income to help the poor. Our neighbors’ school fees and hospital bills were always paid. My mother would bring needy people to our table, and order us to give them the best portions of meat. She’d explain that these people rarely had the chance to eat well. Both my parents were very religious. But they always taught us: ‘Humanity first. Everything else comes after.’ When the genocide began, they invited our Tutsi neighbors to hide in our house. There were seven of them. Some lived under the beds. Others lived in the cupboards. I was a teenager back then and my job was to change the waste buckets. It was a miserable existence, and it went on for months. But we prayed with them. We tried to give them hope. We told them that God was in control. At night we’d give them Muslim dress so they could go in the backyard and get fresh air. Our neighbors suspected us because our curtains were always closed. We never slept because we knew the penalty for hiding Tutsis was death. But all seven people in our house survived. Unfortunately my mother and father died a few years ago, so I must tell their story for them. Their names were Mukamunosi Adha and Gasano Juma. They saved seven lives. And they valued love and humanity more than anything.”
(4/4) “I managed to escape that day, but things had grown desperate. In the end there were two thousand of us trying to survive. We’d begun to run out of food. The militia was losing on the battlefield and began to grow frustrated. Two days before our rescue, they came to the church for a final big attack. They were going in every room. They were finding everyone. Some of the mothers were lying on mattresses over their sons, trying to hide them. But it was no use. I’d managed to climb into the ceiling. I’d poked holes in the exterior wall so I could breathe. Through those holes I could see everything that was happening outside. They tied every boy up, two-by-two. They brought them to this exact spot and began to beat them. Their mothers were screaming and crying from inside the building. One group of boys was pulled to the center. These were my friends. We played soccer together. We studied together. Sebajura. Galindo. Muyoboke. Jean Bosco—he was a believer. They walked up to Jean Bosco and kicked him in the head. They told him: ‘We know you are a friend of Masengo. Tell us where he is.’ And Jean Bosco knew. He knew where I was. He’d seen me climb into the ceiling. But he didn’t say a word. So they beat him harder. They kept saying: ‘Tell us, tell us, tell us.’ But he kept silent. He kept silent until his last breath. And then they shot him. Jean Bosco died because of me. He died for me. Seventy-two young men died that day. The crowd screamed the entire time. But that night when I finally climbed down from the ceiling, everyone was silent. Nobody was saying a word.”
(3/4) “One morning the killers brought a list of names, and gathered everyone together. They told us to sit on the floor. They stepped through the crowd and began reading out the names. My name was called out, but it was misspelled by one letter. They kept shouting ‘Marengo’ instead of ‘Masengo.’ But I knew it was me they were looking for. They told the crowd: ‘If you give up these people, we won’t come back to kill your sons and daughters.’ But nobody spoke. The killers were examining one person at a time. I sat with my head between my knees. Back then I had the face of a girl, so I tried to cover myself with fabric. Some of the killers were from my neighborhood. I knew that when they got around to me, I would be recognized. So I slipped out and ran toward a banana plantation. One of them spotted me and alerted the others. I jumped over a brick fence and dove into the tallest grasses I could find. Soon I heard footsteps. They were walking all around me. I remember one of them saying: ‘Cockroaches are so mysterious. How are they able to disappear?’ He got so frustrated that he hacked at a banana tree with his machete. The leaves fell on my legs. I was lying with my cheek on the dirt. I remember the exact time because my watch was next to my face. It was 12:22 PM. I remember thinking: ‘This is the time I’m going to die.”
(2/4) “The conditions were tolerable at first. We were eating twice a day. We could take showers. But people kept pouring into the church compound. Eventually there were two thousand of us. All the young men began sleeping in the ceiling. Women and children slept on the floor. Beds were given to the elderly. All of the priests abandoned us except for one. His name was Celestin Hakizimana, and he stayed with us until the very end. Every day he’d put on his gown, and stand right here at the gate. When the killers arrived, he would tell them: ‘We only have innocents here. Go find the enemy on the battlefield.’ If they refused to leave, he would take them to the church office and bribe them with money. Once the killers tried to lure him from the compound by saying his father was dead, and that he was needed at the funeral. But he told them: ‘Please send my blessings.’ He wouldn’t abandon us. If any survivors knew the location of their family, Father Celestin would do his best to find them. He would put on his gown and drive out into the world. One night he came back bloodied and beaten. He had been stopped at a roadblock, laid down in the road, and kicked in the street. But the next day he put on his gown once more, and drove out into the world. He couldn’t always keep the killers out. Some days they’d come with lists of people to kill. And there was nothing he could do. He’d do his best to fool them by creating a registry of fake names. But then they would choose people randomly. They’d drag out twenty people at a time and bring them to their death. Nothing could be done.”
(1/4) “When we heard the president had been killed, I ran into the street with my friends. We wanted to see what was happening. Immediately two men came running after us with guns. They were pointing at us and screaming: ‘You killed the president!’ All of us ran in different directions. I ducked into a neighbor’s house and climbed into the ceiling, but my shoes fell off and landed on the bed. The men discovered my shoes and they climbed into the ceiling after me. Luckily I squeezed into a place they could not fit. But when they finally left, the owner of the house told me I had to find another place. He told me that people were hiding at the church of St. Paul, and that I should go there. I left at 3 AM. I walked through the forest. I could hear gunfire and screaming in the dark. The church was less than a kilometer away but the journey took me two hours. When I finally arrived, I discovered hundreds of other survivors. We were housed in the building behind me. Every hour more people would arrive. Each time a newcomer came through the front door, we would rush to them for news. I learned that my brothers had been killed. They had run to a nearby church, but the pastor opened its doors to the killers. Another person told me that my mother had been killed. She’d taken refuge in a nuns’ compound. She was randomly chosen for death and shot in the head at 10 AM. She lived until 5 pm. But by the time I heard this, I couldn’t even cry. I was completely numb. I was just waiting to die myself.”
(3/3) “The killers formed a search party the next morning. They gathered at the top of the hill. We could see them coming toward us, searching every house along the way, and pulling out more people to join the hunt. The mob was growing very big. I knew that the end was upon us. But the fighting was very intense that day. Rockets were flying over our head, and some of them began landing on the hill. One landed so close to the search party that they scattered in different directions. I pulled everyone out of the hiding place and moved them to the forest behind our house. Every night I’d wait until the streets were empty, and I’d bring them food. For two weeks it went on like this. I rationed what little we had. I lost all my weight because I was too scared to eat. My breasts completely disappeared. I didn’t even feel like a woman anymore. I’d nearly given up on life. Every morning I’d pray for the day to finish. And every night I’d pray for the morning to come. My husband wanted us to escape. The only reason we remained in Kigali was to feed those people. And after three weeks the capital finally fell. The Rwandan Patriotic Front was advancing, and the Hutu boarded busses to flee the city. Even the people who were hiding told me to abandon them. So I gave them each a final ration of food and escaped. But all of the people hiding on this property were rescued. And every single one of them is alive today.”
(2/3) “It was too dangerous to hide the man in the house. So I brought him to this small room in the back, which we sometimes rented to tenants. I pushed him inside and locked the door. When I was opening our shop the next morning, another man came running to me for help. He was limping badly. He was out of breath and drenched in sweat. I recognized him as a prominent Tutsi businessman. ‘Save my life!’ he screamed. ‘They are chasing me!’ So I quickly pulled him to the back of the house and locked him in this same room. A few minutes later the killers arrived. They searched all over the main house, but never checked the back room. Over the next few days, six more people came looking for help. We hid them all. But my neighbors had been spying on us. They reported everything. And one night the killers showed up with guns. When they knocked on the door, my husband started shivering and couldn’t stand up. I told him: ‘You’re the man of the house. You must stand firm and face them.’ But he couldn’t move. So I went to the door myself. The killers were standing there with a list of the people hiding in our house. ‘Where are these cockroaches?’ they said. I tried to tell them that we had no cockroaches, but they pushed past me and started searching. They beat my husband until he was unable to speak. I offered them all the money we had, and only then did they stop. But they told us that they’d be coming back during the daylight for a house-to-house search.”
(1/3) “My husband and I were shopkeepers at the time of the genocide. We sold groceries on one side of the shop, and on the other side we had a bar. On the night the president’s plane was shot down, the place was full. Everyone was dancing and listening to music. We heard a large explosion but didn’t think anything of it. Everyone just went back to dancing. But the next morning people began shopping frantically. We were selling food in large quantities. When we were down to the last 100 kilograms of potatoes, I decided not to sell anymore. I could tell that danger was coming. Nobody came to the bar that night. The streets were empty and quiet. People were either planning violence, or they were hiding. We were one of the first cities to be liberated during the genocide. So almost immediately there was fierce fighting throughout the city. The killers knew they had to murder as quickly as possible. They were herding groups of Tutsis onto bridges and shooting them all. My husband and I had a reputation for being friendly with Tutsis, so we were suspected of being traitors. Our neighbors began watching us closely. We feared for our lives. We had a lot of property, so we knew there was a big incentive to murder us. When the first Tutsis came to us looking for shelter, we turned them away. But one night I was walking near the house, and I heard a close friend calling to me from a tree. He was dying of hunger. It had been raining all day. I said to myself: ‘The property isn’t worth it,’ and I invited him inside. I didn’t even inform my husband.”
(4/4) “The journey to the border took nearly four hours. Our pace was very slow because there were so many kids in the group, and everyone was weak from hunger. We had to avoid the main roads. Thankfully I’d mapped out the route so I could find our path in the dark. All of us were frightened. Even if we heard an animal, everyone would jump. When we arrived at the border, I pointed the group toward Burundi and headed back to camp. I was confident that I’d avoided detection. Several days passed without incident. I even managed to run one more mission with a mother and child. But somehow news leaked out. And one night when I was returning from patrol, a Tutsi solider met me at the door of the barracks. He was out of breath. ‘You are already dead,’ he said. ‘They will torture you.’ I thought he was just being paranoid, but then I heard my name being called out on the radio. Orders were given to shoot me on sight. I left everything behind and began to run. I hopped over the fence. I didn’t stop running until I arrived at the border. The next time anyone saw me, I was on television bearing witness to the crimes I had seen.”
(3/4) “Our base was only twenty kilometers from the border with Burundi. After the first day of killings, I rode to the border on a bicycle-- just to study the route. I knew that I was taking a giant risk. But I was a religious person. I was a Christian before I was a soldier. So for me, killing innocent people was more of a risk than trying to help them escape. Many Tutsi families were part of my church community. I had prayed with them many times. So when one of them reached out for help, I could not refuse. They told me their neighbors had just been murdered. They feared they were next. So I told them to gather in one place and meet me at midnight. I snuck out of the camp. I told my roommate to tell everyone I was sick on the toilet. When I got to the meeting place, I was expecting to find one family, but there were twenty-three people waiting. Many of them were too scared to come out of the bush. They saw my uniform and thought I was leading them to their death. But the mother of the family gathered everyone together for prayer. She said: ‘Lord, we are frightened. But we are going to trust our brother in Christ to take us to safety.’”
(2/4) “There had always been permission to kill any Tutsis we discovered while on patrol. But on April 6th our instructions became very clear: every Tutsi was to be found and killed. It was even said over the radio. Our first official order was to drive to a nearby city and open fire on unarmed civilians. Most soldiers carried out the orders with glee. The hatred had sunk into their core. Let it be remembered that the killings were pursued with pride, passion, and determination. Soldiers fired indiscriminately at people walking down the road. I pretended to participate, but I didn’t pull the trigger. That night we returned to the camp and everyone swapped stories. They bragged about how many people they’d killed. It became a competition. Soldiers would radio from other bases, and say: ‘We’ve killed so many already. Why can’t you keep up?’ All of it was sickening. I couldn’t eat for weeks. But it was most traumatizing for the Tutsi soldiers in our army. My roommate was a Tutsi. He had to pretend like he was enjoying the murder of his friends and family. He had to laugh along with the others to save his own life. He could only remove his mask with me. And he was the only one that I trusted with my plan.”
(1/4) “When I was twelve years old, they undressed a Tutsi girl in front of my entire school. They wanted to see if her private parts were the same as other people. She kept trying to cover herself with her hands while they pulled out her hairs one by one. I can still hear the laughter. Even with all the violence that came later, that was the most traumatic moment of my life. It’s still the image I see when I’m trying to fall asleep. The genocide didn’t begin until many years later, when I was twenty-five years old. I was a soldier in the army. I could tell the atmosphere was growing more and more tense. Our commanders were openly using ethnic slurs. There was talk of ‘wiping our enemies from this country.’ One night I was assigned to guard four Tutsi prisoners. They’d been accused of making explosives but were clearly innocent civilians. They’d been tortured. Their wounds were rotten and stinking. A major came to the cell at 1AM and ordered me to step aside. ‘These people need to be killed immediately,’ he said. But I refused. I told him those were not my instructions. He pushed and screamed, but eventually he stormed off. The prisoners were released a few days later, but someone followed them out and killed them. It was a sign of things to come.”
